CLUSTER ANALYSIS IN R

STEPS –We have installed R. Now we have to perform cluster analysis on the file WineKMC, hence we will install the skmeans package that will help us to perform k means clustering.
To install skmeans, we have –
	install.packages("skmeans", dependencies = TRUE)
 
After installing the package, we activate the package by
	library(skmeans)
Now, we will check the directory and change if needed. We set the directory to our customized new folder where the csv file resides.
 

Now, we will create a variable winedata that will read the WineKMC.csv file into R. It will be done by –
	winedata <- read.csv("WineKmc.csv")

Now, we will check the first few columns of the winedata
	winedata[,1:9]
 

	We can see that many values are displayed as NA. So to convert them to 0, we will use the is.na() function on the variable winedata that holds the wine data.
	winedata[is.na(winedata)] <- 0 has been applied to change from NA to 0. This will be affected in the whole winedata where there is NA.

To display the winedata after we changed it to 0,
 

As the data is cleaned, we will start performing the clustering on the winedata.

Now, we transpose the customers’ data starting from Adams to last Young. It starts with 8 till 107. We create the new variable winedata.transpose so that the winedata won’t be affected while performing clustering. The t function will help us to transpose the data. Few variables have been shown below –
 

Now, we perform the k-means clustering on the transposed wine data using the skmeans package, with k=3 and method= “genetic”.

After the clustering is done and the objects are divided into 3 clusters, winedata.clusters stores the clustering of the winedata.
Now we will store the counts of the clusters back into 3 columns by storing it into winedata.clustercounts as shown below –

Results & Profiling:
After combining the winedata 1-7 variables and the 3 cluster counts, it will be easy to analyze-
Now, we will sort the data by every cluster to see the characteristics in each cluster.
Sort Cluster 1 – In this cluster we see that varietal Pinot Noir is used more. 

Sort Cluster 2: After second sorting we can observe that all top clusters for low volume (minimum quantity) so that means preference is for minimum quantity -

Sort Cluster 3: Here we can observe that all top 4 clusters are for champagne hence it is clearly more popular.

Thus, Cluster analysis has been performed on the wine data using R.

